This is 2014. That was the year that
Slack actually launched. I was
interviewed by MIT Technology Review and
asked if we were working to improve
Slack. I said, I feel like what we have
right now is just a giant piece of [__]
It's just terrible and we should be
humiliated that we offer this to the
public. To me, that was like, you should
be embarrassed. If you can't see almost
limitless opportunities to improve, then
you shouldn't be designing the product.
Slack was famous for being one of the
early consumerized B2B SAS products
>> at more than one company all hands. I
made everyone in the company [music]
repeat this as a chant. In the long run,
the measure of our success will be the
amount of value that we create for
customers. And you can put effort into
demonstrating that you have created
[music] this value and stuff like that,
but there's no substitute for actually
having created it.
>> Something else I heard that you often
espouse is friction in the product
experience is actually often a good
thing. It it became an assumption that
you should always be trying to remove
friction when the challenge is really
comprehension. If your software kind of
stops me and asks me to make a decision
and I don't really understand it, you
make me feel stupid. If people could get
over the idea of reducing friction as a
number of goal or reducing the number of
clicks or taps to do something [music]
and instead focus on how can I make this
simple? How do I prevent people from
having to think in order to use my
software?
>> You started two companies both famously
pivoted. I imagine many people come to
you for advice on pivoting. The decision
is about like have you exhausted [music]
the possibilities? Creating the distance
so that you can make an intellectual
rational decision about it rather than
an emotional decision is essential. And
the reason I say you have to be coldly
rational about it is because [music]
it's [__] humiliating.
Today my guest is Stuart Butterfield, a
founder and product legend who rarely
does podcasts. Stuart founded Flickr and
then Slack, which he sold to Salesforce
in one of the biggest acquisitions in
tech history at the time. There is so
much product and leadership wisdom
locked away in his head. I feel like our
conversation just scratched the surface.
We chat about utility curves, something
he calls the owner's delusion, a
hilarious pattern he sees at companies
he calls hyper realistic worklike
activities, what he's learned about
product and craft and taste and
Parkinson's law, why you need to obsess
with not making your users [music]
think, the backstory on his legendary we
don't sell saddles here memo, and so
much more. A huge [music] thank you to
Noah Weiss, Chris Cordal, Ally Rail, and
Johnny Rogers for suggesting [music]
topics and questions for this
conversation. This is a really special
one and I really hope to have Stuart
back to delve even deeper. If you enjoy
this podcast, [music] don't forget to
subscribe and follow it in your favorite
podcasting app or YouTube. It helps
tremendously. And if you become an
annual subscriber of my newsletter, you
get 17 incredible products for free for
an entire year, including Devon,
lovable, replet, bolt, init, and linear,
superhuman, descript, gamma, perplexity,
warp, granola, magic patterns, raycast,
chappd, and mobin. Head on over to
lenny's newswletter.com and click
product pass. With that, I bring you
Stuart Butterfield after a short word
from our sponsors.
Here's a puzzle for you. What do OpenAI,
Cursor, Perplexity, Verscell, Platt, and
hundreds of other winning companies have
in common? The answer is they're all
powered by today's sponsor, Work OS. If
you're building software for
enterprises, you've probably felt the
pain of integrating single signon, skim,
arbback, audit logs, and other features
required by big customers. Work OS turns
those deal blockers into drop-in APIs
with a modern developer platform built
specifically for B2B SAS. Whether you're
a seedstage startup trying to land your
first enterprise customer or a unicorn
expanding globally, work OS is the
fastest path to becoming enterprise
[music] ready and unlocking growth.
They're essentially Stripe for
enterprise features. Visit workos.com to
get [music] started or just hit up their
Slack support where they have real
engineers in there who answer your
questions super fast. Workos allows you
to build like the best with delightful
APIs, comprehensive docs, and a smooth
developer experience. Go to works.com to
make your app enterprise ready today.
This episode is brought to you by
Metronome. You just launched your new
shiny AI product. The new pricing page
looks awesome, but behind it, [music]
last minute glue code, messy
spreadsheets, and running ad hoc queries
to figure out what to build. Customers
get invoices they can't understand.
Engineers are chasing billing bugs.
Finance can't close the books. With
Metronome, you hand it all off to the
realtime billing infrastructure that
just works. Reliable, flexible, and
built to grow with you, Metronome turns
raw usage events into accurate [music]
invoices, gives customers bills they
actually understand, and keeps every
team in sync in real time. Whether
you're launching usage based pricing,
managing enterprise contracts, or
rolling out new AI services, Metronome
does the heavy lifting so that you can
focus on your product, not your billing.
That's why some of the fastest growing
companies in the world like OpenAI and
Anthropic run their billing on
Metronome. Visit metronome.com to learn
more. That's metronome.com.
>> Stuart, thank you so much for being here
and welcome to the podcast.
>> Thank you for having me. I'm excited.
>> I'm even more excited. I'm so honored to
have you here. Uh I never told you this,
but you've been towards the very top of
my wish list of guests to have on this
podcast ever since I started this
podcast a few years ago. So, I'm very
excited that we're finally making this
happen. I have so many questions for
you. My first question is just what the
heck are you up to these days? I feel
like ever since you left Slack, we
haven't heard much from Stuart. I'm
curious what you're up to. Hopefully,
you're just chilling.
>> I'm mostly just chilling. I left
Salesforce um 2 and 1/2 years ago, and I
have a 2 and a halfyear-old. So, she was
actually born 3 days after my my last
day, so a lot of time with family. And
it's like an enormous privilege to be
able to spend time with young kids while
they're while they're young. um no new
company to announce or anything like
that. Um, I do get a lot of emails and
texts like basically like every three to
six weeks there's this cycle because Cal
Henderson who's the CTO of Slack and who
also we work together on Flickr so have
worked together now for 23 years have
been talking about what we want to do
next um if there is something but you
know honestly the the big challenge has
been uh I think these things are kind of
destroying the world um and What we're
good at is making software. Um, so you
can find some way to make software that
helped people use their phones less
often, then that would be a big winner,
but haven't come up with anything good.
A lot of philanthropic work. Uh, nothing
to announce there yet, but there's like
some cool um projects that I'm working
on and a lot of like just personal
creative art projects and supporting
other artists and and stuff like that.
To prep for this chat, I talked to so
many people that have worked with you
over the years to try to figure out what
you taught them about building product,
building teams, building companies that
most stuck with them, that most helped
them build amazing products. The first
is a is a concept called utility curves.
This came up a bunch across so many
people that have worked with you. Talk
about what is a utility curve, how you
think use that to build better products.
This is pretty easy because it's a very
familiar S-curve where you know you have
uh it's flat and start it's arcing up
and then there's a really steep part and
then it levels off again. And on the
horizontal axis uh you can think of cost
or effort and on the vertical axis it's
value or convenience. It kind of depends
exactly what you're talking about. But
the idea is um
the first bit of effort you put into
something doesn't result in a huge
amount of value and then there's some
magic threshold where it produces an
enormous amount of value and then
continued investment doesn't really pay
off. The most basic example I can think
of is let's say you're making a hammer
and on that bottom axis it's now quality
and if the hammer uh has a handle that
breaks with any impact and is totally
useless and if you make it a little bit
stronger it's still pretty useless. And
it's kind of like junk, junk, junk,
junk, junk. Okay, good. Great. Then it
doesn't matter anymore. If you're making
an app, okay, this app's going to have
users and so let's make a users table in
the database and so far you have
generated no value. The reason I I felt
like this was so important is because we
would talk about like a feature um and
usually features are thought of as as
binary like you either have this feature
or you don't. And so the argument I
guess was
have we just not invested enough in this
or have we got all the value or
convenience or you know quality or
whatever that we can get out of this um
and and we've had dim pointed diminish
returns and it just doesn't matter and I
I think in many cases people will add a
feature it's not good enough um and so
people don't use it or appreciate it but
now you've added some complexity to the
app and then people give up or take it
back or you know they tried something in
in testing and they don't get the
results they want and so they decide
that this thing isn't worth doing. And
so we would try to really investigate
and and decide whether we were on the
first shallow part of the curve, the
second shell part of the curve or we you
know we're just coming up to it. So I
think it's a lot easier to understand
the value of this when you're talking
about a specific app and a and a
specific uh feature. But um I think it
was ultimately helpful in getting people
to like understand whether something was
was worth it or not.
>> Okay. So just to mirror back what I'm
hearing, there's kind of this if you
visualize this curve at the bottom it's
like I don't even know what this is. And
then up the curve is like okay I sort of
get it and then at the top is okay I
can't live without this now that I
understand what this is for. It feels
like it's like a really it's a different
way of thinking about getting to the aha
moment for someone where they see okay
saved items. I get it. I need to use
this constantly. It feels like this
works both for a specific feature and
also just for Slack, like getting people
to even understand here's what Slack can
do for you and then now I can't live
without Slack. And essentially this is a
lens you use to figure out where to
spend product resources because if you
don't get up that curve to I get it and
I can't live without it, nothing else
matters. Is that the way is that the
framework?
>> Yeah. Yeah. And I think then you layer
on another concept like the um [snorts]
Bezos used the term divine discontent.
Um
the line actually moves because once
people are familiar with a piece of
software or the way a feature is
implemented or something like that,
their standards go up and so the there's
like this competition. And again this
axis can be utility is the best general
term for it but it could be quality,
convenience, um speed, it could be any
any number of things. But as you improve
your search capability or if if as as
you improve your login experience or
your forget password experience or your
checkout experience or whatever,
everyone else is as well. And so there's
this continued investment
and when you know forget about thinking
about a new feature you're looking at
how the product works overall and
usually things get kind of implemented
once and then if they're lucky they get
improved upon periodically. Most things
get improved upon very infrequently and
some things get improved upon never. And
you know, I want to give an example at
the absolute extreme because I don't
actually don't know how long this has
been, but I try not to criticize other
people's software so much because I very
familiar with the tradeoffs and
prioritization and how hard it can be
and blah blah blah blah. But okay, so it
most people have the Gmail calendar app
on their phone. I travel a fair bit. I'm
mostly in the eastern time zone.
sometimes in mountain time, sometimes in
Pacific, sometimes in English time, and
sometimes in uh Japan, Central Europe.
There's like a, you know, maybe 10 time
zones, 12 time zones um that I would
ever choose.
When you uh hit the option to set the
time zone on an event in Google Calendar
on the iOS app, it presents all the time
zones in the world in alphabetical
order. And that's like the I mean
there's probably worse orderings, but
that there's there's no value in that.
Um and even when you start searching
um it still presents them in
alphabetical order by country with that
turn. So if I'm in California and I'm
trying to set an appointment for next
week when I'm back in New York and I
type in EA S
and I get a bunch of garbage. Okay, East
Narn. And then the first one is Eastern
Australia, New South Wales. Um, and then
Eastern Australia, Queensland. And then
Eastern Australia, Daylight Savings, and
Eastern Australia, Standard Time. And
then you're like, well, [__] what? I I
can't remember which one is Daily
Savings and which one is Standard Time.
And you know what? I could keep going
like this for a while. This is an app
that's used by at least hundreds of
millions of people, presumably every
single Google employee. It's bananas how
bad it is. There's so many like there's
all these clever things you could do
like you know me I'm on the west coast
first option should be the east coast
and vice versa but it it definitely
shouldn't be that every time zone is
presented with equal you know value
there's I don't even know couple hundred
time zones I grew up in Canada there's a
Newfoundland has its own time zone which
is offset by half an hour the population
of Newfoundland is about half a million
people not that many people go to visit
Newfoundland maybe a million people in
all of history. So like a million and a
half out of 8 billion people. And
there's Newf Finland, you know, like the
same with China time, which is like 25%
of the world's population in this study.
Anyway, I and that was a little bit
longer than I intended to go on this
example, but it is um
uh it's crazy because no one's going to
switch to Gmail or to to G Suite, Google
Calendar from Outlook Exchange because
the time zone picker is good. So maybe
in some sense it doesn't matter, but at
the same time there's a real value in in
delighting customers and there's an
emotional connection that they form or
don't form. Um, and in some cases that
can be really positive, like they would
recommend it. And when they switch
companies or decide to start their own
company, they're going to choose to use
this product or advocate for it because
of that emotional connection. And vice
versa, they'll also be like, I hate this
thing. This drives me bananas. I really
think we should stop using it or, you
know, advocate for the alternative. Uh,
and I I think people just don't
appreciate or come back to those things
often enough. And then there's this
category of like really essential parts
of the app again like account creation,
sign up, forgot password, you know,
things like that that
for most organizations very infrequently
get a lot of love and and iteration and
improvement despite the fact that the
kind of the quality bar has gone up
across the board and and continually
goes up. Let's go down that rabbit hole
a little bit more around delight and
craft. Slack was famous for being one of
the early, let's say, consumerized B2B
SAS products. Slack leaned into delight
and experience and craft and a great
experience. And you just as a product
leader, I'd say is are known as as very
taste forward, very craftoriented
leader, which is pretty rare and I think
continues to be rare. So there's a few
things I want to talk about here. One is
uh taste. I heard at a talk you gave of
a really unique that you gave a talk on
taste and you have a really unique
perspective on just what taste is what
product taste looks like. Can you share
that? There is a lot of you going back
to the utility curves again. People who
are obsessed with this one little thing
and you know keep on adding more and
more detail improvements beyond the
point where it makes much of a
difference. But um I guess a couple
things about taste. So one is can you
learn to develop it? I think so because
like the word literally comes from
experiencing food and putting stuff in
your mouth. And can people become better
chefs with training? Yes, absolutely.
Undoubtedly, some people have a natural
advantage or are, you know, born with
this ability to make discernments that
are difficult for other people to make
and stuff like that. But you can
definitely practice and you can
definitely get better. The second thing
I'd say is um you can create a real
advantage for yourself, for your
product, for your company um by leaning
into it because most people don't have
good taste and don't invest. And so
you're probably familiar with the again
Jeff Bezos line, your margin is my
opportunity. Um and pretty obvious what
he meant by that. I would tell the story
at Slack over and over again and
actually made it part of the new hire
welcome. So, uh, I'm I'm going I'm in
Vancouver at our Vancouver office and
I'm going for a walk with Brandon Velost
who's our um at the time creative
director for product development. I
think that was his title. And uh we're
in the Yeltown neighborhood in
Vancouver. So, there's like really
narrow sidewalks because it used to be a
warehouse district and now it's like,
you know, fancy restaurants and nail
salons and boutiques and stuff. And as
it does in Vancouver, it starts to rain.
We don't have umbrellas and we're
walking back to the office and most
people have umbrellas and we're, you
know, kind of on these narrow sidewalks
with people coming towards us with
umbrellas. And we noticed how few people
would move their umbrella out of the
way. And of course, you know, the other
person like their umbrella, the pokey
bits are exactly at eye level for for
people walking towards them. I mean, we
would get like, you know, forced off the
sidewalk or like having to duck down or
whatever. And we it became a game like
we were guessing, is this person going
to tilt their umbrella out of the way so
we can pass or not? And something like
onethird of the people would do it. And
we had this conversation about it where
it's like, okay, I can think of three
reasons why people wouldn't do it. One
is they have very few avenues in their
life to exercise power and this is one
of them and they're just like want to
get out there and dominate people and
cause suffering. So shouldn't ascribe to
malice that which can be ascribed to
ignorance. So that's probably you know
that probably is the explanation for a
tiny tiny tiny percentage of people. But
the other two explanations aren't that
great either. One is that uh they see
it's happening. they see they're pushing
other people off the sidewalk um or
poking them in the eye or whatever and
they're just like, "Fuck, that's too
bad. I you know, I wish there was
something I could do about that, but I
can't think of anything." And the last
reason is they just don't notice at all
that they're just oblivious to their
impact on on other people and they're
they're so in their head. And I can't
really think of any other explanations
for it besides that. And so we would say
at like tilting your umbrella is our
opportunity. said that's not a great
rephrase of a your margin is my
opportunity, but your failure to really
be considerate and uh exercise this
courtesy and really be empathic about
other people's experience is a an
advantage. you can create a critical
advantage and I think that there's many
reasons why stock was successful at the
moment it was successful and and I think
we had a bunch of really wonderful
tailwinds and and all of that stuff but
it wouldn't have grown the way it did
without those little conveniences which
caused people to form an emotional
connection because a lot of our growth
came from you know startup A uses Slack
and then someone leaves startup A for
startup B and startup B doesn't use
Slack yet and they would be like oh my
god God, you guys, we really this is
this is so good. We got to try it. And
uh and the the spread was driven by that
cross-pollination and people really
genuinely advocating for it.
>> That is an amazing metaphor. I
[laughter] I love that one moment became
like a value of product craftsmanship.
It
>> tilt your umbrella was like was a very
common saying on you know company swag
and and stuff like that.
>> Is there an example? I I imagine there
are many, but from the time of building
Slack, especially in the early days,
where you chose to go big on
craftsmanship and experience and and
delight versus speed, where you thought
looking back that was a really great
idea and it worked really cord to
success.
>> Here's a bunch of little examples. Um,
so someone else came up with this idea
and I'm I'm trying to remember who it
was. um by let's see maybe Andre Torres,
maybe Ben Brown, something like that. We
was like, "Hey, why did we ask people
for email address and password if um
they their ownership of the email
address was the thing that allowed them
to create the account in the first
place? Why don't we just ask them for
their email address and then send them a
link?" And so when Slack's first version
of the mobile app came out, we're like
typing your password on your phone if
you have any, you know, minimal
threshold of of password hygiene is a
terrible experience. Say capital H
lowerase Q sex correct period. But so
let's just have them enter the email
address. We'll send them a link. The
link will automatically open the app and
and authenticate them. And so there's
one little example.
>> Wow. So you guys invented the magic link
uh experience. someone else invented. I
want to be clear that u I I had seen
that idea somewhere else like someone
else a blog post about it or something
like that but we were the first ones
that to my knowledge that that really
kind of like scaled that and made it a
standard. There is another one which we
you know we're really puzzled about in
the very early days where people have a
long history of using messaging apps
from like AOL instant messenger to SMS
to um WhatsApp where their expectation
is they get a notification for every
message that's received and in the case
of Slack that doesn't make as much sense
because you're a member of many channels
and the messages may not be for you and
so that's why we have the at tagging
people And um you know we certainly
didn't invent that. That was that was
Twitter. Um but what we realized was
people were signing up for Slack you
know and it's like one engineer on this
team inside of this larger organization
inside this larger company and they
would pull in the person next to them
and they would say let's try it out and
then they would send a message and then
well personally be like I didn't get a
notification. This is this is [__]
Um,
so we reluctantly decided that we had to
send notifications for every single
message as the default for new accounts.
But once you had I don't remember what
the thresholds were happen once you had
received 10 messages, we would pop up
this little thing that says, "Hey, you
have our default settings for
notifications. We don't want Slack to be
noisy for you. Would you like to switch
to our recommended settings?" and then
they would just click a link and it
would, you know, have what should be the
default, which is you only get a
notification if it's a DM or if someone
tags you. But we realized it was worth
that investment to get people over the
hub. A much more uh well, here's I'll
give one one more simple one and then
one kind of more complex one. people
would just like the I can't remember if
it's called urgent or important but the
flag in in Outlook that like you know
set the priority of a message for the
recipients always got abused inside of
every company as as soon as someone does
it like everyone's like okay I'm going
to do that too for my message and so all
of your messages have the little flag
and it becomes useless we have at
everyone which causes a notification to
be sent to every member of the channel
when a message is sent and people would
start you know look someone would find
this feature inside of an organization
they would at everyone. Everyone would
get a notification and then the next
person to send a message was like well
my thing is more important than um Bob
saying I'm going to also at everyone and
it became really obnoxious and people
would complain about it but it was a I
don't know I guess tragedy of the
commons. It's not quite exactly the same
thing but it was this real dynamic that
happened over and over again. So, um, we
came up with what was called the shouty
rooster. And internally, we said, "Don't
be a cock." Um, but we didn't obviously
say that publicly. When you at everyone,
a little rooster would pop up and it
would have like the sound waves coming
out of its mouth and being really
obnoxious and say, "Hey, this is going
to cause a notification for 147 people
in eight different time zones. Are you
sure you want to send this message with
that at everyone?" Um, and of course
that worked amazingly and it dropped
off. Um, and again it was really trying
to shape people's behavior so that they
used we wanted to be very flexible. Um,
but we knew that there was ways to use
it that would be annoying and and
difficult for everyone and so try to
shape the communication culture inside
the organization to take best advantage
on it.
>> That feature still exists. I see that
rooster all it or no I don't see it all.
Well actually I do at channel because I
run a big Slack. Uh, so I see that
rooster uh that survived.
>> Yeah. Um, yeah, that survived and and
good because it was
>> right
>> it was a trivially easy thing to
implement and made a really big
difference, but it also taught people
how the product worked because people
probably didn't know that at everyone
rat channel. Um,
>> right,
>> you know, didn't think about the cost at
least.
>> Genius.
>> Yeah. Here's here's one more. Uh, so we
decided we're going to do do not disturb
as a feature. Um [clears throat]
and we had this not conundrum but we
you're trying to take into account all
the all the different uses of Zack
because at the time we we implemented
this
like 2017 there was you know tens of
thousands of of paying customers the
organizations hundreds of them probably
millions of users maybe hundreds of
thousands of organizations I don't
remember how many um and everyone had
set up stuff the way that they liked it
including things like ops alerts going
into channels for on call engineers for
for you know some of the biggest
systems uh and and apps in the world and
so we couldn't just like deploy it right
away. We realized that some of the
decision makers, the owners of the
organizations were going to have really
strong opinions about this. We also
realized that some of the end users are
going to have strong opinions and we
wanted to figure out a way to kind of
balance the concerns and give people
appropriate means of control. So we came
up with this really elaborate system for
the roll out which was we told everyone
um I'm sorry every every Slack
administrator that this was coming weeks
before it came and we told them that we
were going to set a default for their
organization which I believe was um
either 700 p.m. to 7 a.m. in their local
time zone or or 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. I
can't remember which was, but also that
they could override that default and
also that the individual end users could
override that system owner default. And
finally, that the system owner could if
they changed the default again would
overwrite all of the the end users
preferences and then the end users could
uh overwrite them again. And it wasn't
to create this dynamic where people were
at war, but so that you could change a
policy and then people could still
customize and stuff like that. But this
was, you know, a much longer and more
convoluted process, but it allowed the
millions of people who were using Slack
to get the feature without creating a
bunch of conflict and without people
turning it off automatically. And I
think critically with setting a bunch of
defaults, um, because if we didn't set
the default, most people wouldn't turn
it on at all. You like, if there wasn't
if we didn't default you to do not
disturb from 8:00 p.m. to 8 a.m., um,
you probably, if you're the average
person, wouldn't ever do it yourself.
Um, so that's a another elaborate
example uh where I think that investment
made sense because it was a critical
feature for a lot of people and um if we
hadn't done it that way, I think it
would have caused a lot of complaints
and conflict and and stuff like that.
>> Those are amazing examples. I very much
appreciate that do not disturb feature
when you guys launched that. I still
remember that coming out. I'm sure a lot
of people are very thankful for that.
>> Yeah.
Something else I heard that you often
espouse which is counterintuitive to a
lot of people is is about friction.
Friction in the product experience that
friction is actually often a good thing
that you actually it's a feature not a
bug a lot of times if you use it well.
Talk about your your experience there.
>> Yeah. Well, and so yes. Um, and there's
also another um issue around friction,
which is
it became like a mantra or just like a
kind of an assumption that you should
always be trying to remove friction. And
uh in in some cases that's true. You
know, we would talk about in Slack like
it was hard to market. It was hard to
explain what it was if you had never
used it before. You could say a
messaging app for businesses or or
whatever, but you know, like a critical
disadvantage to Slack doing out of home
advertising, putting up a billboard
versus beer or cars is no one needs to
be explained why they would want a car
or beer. Um, but everyone would have to
be explained why they why they want
slack. Um, and so the problem there is
is comprehension. And this will come up
uh an enormous amount. So now imagine
you want to get tickets to the Taylor
Swift concert in San Francisco and you
go to the ticket master website. If you
think about both your your
comprehension, it's perfect in this case
and um that translates into the
specificity of your intent and the
degree of your intent is also kind of
maxed out. So look, I really want to get
these tickets and I know exactly what
they are. They're Taylor Swift tickets
for this date at this venue. And so in
that scenario, it doesn't really matter
if Ticket Ptor's website is slow. It
doesn't really matter if the payments
page errors out. Like you're going to
persist and and get through it. So
obviously they're better to reduce
friction, but in some sense it doesn't
there's not a huge amount of of value in
doing that. Uh for most creators of of
products, there are a handful of cases
where that really is true for you as
well. And they they include things like
user registration, um authentication,
uh checkout flows for e-commerce, like
I'm I am significantly more likely to
buy something if there's Apple Pay or
Shop Pay, something like that. I'm
significantly less likely to carry
through the purchase of something. If
the I have to manually enter all of the
fields of my address one at a time,
rather than having one of those address
pickers, it's it's crazy. But like the
issue is my intent isn't always 100%.
Right? And the specificity of my intent
isn't always 100%. So if your thing is
direct to consumer t-shirts and you
acquire customers through Instagram ads,
all of them know what t-shirts are. It's
like I this looks like a good t-shirt to
me, but I'm rarely like 100% intent. I
might have like, you know, very specific
intent, but I might intent's like 70%.
So if you're the amount of friction is
uh above that I just I'm not going to do
it. But now okay people coming to
slack.com they had some
uh friend had mentioned Slack and kind
of talked their ear off at some point
months ago and then they saw a news
article and then they saw someone's
tweet and then they saw an ad on a
website they were visiting and they
finally said, "Okay, I'm going to go to
this website." So their intent is like
at the absolute minimum threshold. Like
it's just it was before that last event
happened they were below and now they're
above but they're just above. The
specificity of their intent like I need
to get Taylor Swift concerts for this
date at this venue um is also very low
because they're like at it's a work
thing. I'm not sure it's a spreadsheet
or like a calendar or to look exactly
what it is. Um so they were coming in at
you know.1%
over these these critical thresholds. Um
[clears throat] what was the challenge?
It wasn't friction right because it's
not like they were aiming for something
and they knew what they were aiming for
and they were just trying to get
themselves to that point.
What we had to worry about was creating
comprehension and in two senses. What is
this thing? Um, and what am I supposed
to do next? And that creation of
comprehension in the in the sense of
explaining stuff, that creation of
comprehension in the sense of the design
of the of the UI of the screen of the
page or whatever and the um the visual
hierarchy and the affordances that are
there and the and the um indication of
things to interact with and and which
thing should be the next thing to do and
all that stuff that becomes really
critical and I think very very few
people recognize that. They're like, I
want to get people who come to my web
page to the sign up form as quickly as
possible. But if they don't know what
they're signing up for and they don't
know what it's going to do after, is it
going to spam them? Um, they don't know
what am I going to have to pay on the
next step or or what, then they're just
going to back out. And this was like a a
lifelong battle because the remove
friction um kind of orientation is so
deep in people. Again, it really makes a
difference in in those cases where
people do have an intent and they do
know what they're trying to do. Um, it
is a a poor approach when the challenge
is really comprehension. And I think the
secret is most 70% 80% or whatever of of
product design is in that comprehension
step because like people if they do ever
open the preferences tab and look at all
the options rarely have an idea. And if
you can't teach them,
you know, or or make it possible for
them to discover what the capabilities
are, then they're not going to take
advantage of them and they're not going
to get as much out of it. And I think
that the trick is for most of the unique
parts of any application, most of like
the specific things that your app, your
product, your software does, areas where
the challenge is going to be
comprehension, insider friction. It it
really could be anything like Shopify.
Um, the purpose of the of the service
for its end users is generally going to
be kind of clear, but most people, most
first-time store openers don't know that
they can get reports or if they know
that they can get reports, they don't
know what kinds of reports. And if they
know what kinds of reports they can get,
they don't know how they can tweak them
and how they can um, you know, what the
timing should be and which things to
that are are more important to display.
And I could go on and on and on and on
and people just don't recognize that.
So, like the I want to see if this still
true. I'm just going to open my iPhone.
Um, and the clock app and they had the
most the craziest description for
alarms.
Um, okay. It's still it's a little bit
different. Um, but people can look at
their own phone. So, I have it says
alarms and then it says sleep and a
vertical bar wake up and says no alarm
and a button that says change and then
if you hit it, it says sleep is off. In
order to automatically turn on sleep
features and edit your schedule, you
need to turn sleep on. So, obviously
like sleep was a good name for this
thing if you already had a way of
getting people to understand it. If you
don't, it's like un-grammatical and
incomprehensible and why would you ever
do it? And I got to guess, it's been
like this for years. 90 plus% and maybe
like 98% of people just do what I do,
which is you just create like I want the
alarm on and I'm going to set the time
for it. And I don't know what turning
sleep on does. Um, but it's just like
the the lack of comprehension prevents
people from getting the value. And I'm
sure that there's a bunch of value
behind turning sleep on, whatever that
means. And people spend a lot of time on
those features and it integrates with
like biometrics in your watch or who
knows. I again I still don't know
because turning sleep on is like I don't
what does that do and what is it going
to cost me and what impact it's going to
have. Um those examples are just to me
all over the place. And the the reason I
don't use most software where there was
an actual choice point or the reason I
don't use most features where there was
a choice point for me is because I
didn't understand what they were going
to do and I don't give a [__] And if
there is one mantra that I would use to
replace that it's don't make me think. I
don't if you remember that that book.
>> Absolutely.
>> Yeah. And honestly it's been many more
than 10 years since I read it. So I
don't know if you remember all the
examples in the book, but as a mantra
that was like up there with utility
curves because for two reasons. One is
it's just like it it's expensive to make
a decision like you literally burn
glucose like there's a metabolic action.
there's like ATP created in the
mitochondria in your neurons and like a
bunch of stuff is happening and people
do get decision fatigue and there is
like you know cognitive cost of all
these things but also there's an
emotional aspect which is if you if your
software kind of stops me a second and
asks me to make a decision and I don't
really understand it you make me feel
stupid right I'm like I don't understand
this
I some people are are you maybe their
orientation is okay that the software is
stupid but I think Most people are like,
"Oh, I'm dumb." And if you ever talk to
people who aren't especially technically
savvy, you know, like the canonical
example is like people who are under 50
talking to their parents about using
some piece of software and what they're
supposed to do. The parents almost
always feel stupid, like they're the
ones that are that are wrong. Um, and so
if you're causing people to think in the
the best case it's like unnecessary
use of their, you know, biological
resources, and in the worst case, you've
like now made them feel bad, like
emotionally bad, and they're going to
associate that with a product forever.
And I mean, these are things are just
kind of rolling one into the other. So,
I'm going to uh keep going with one last
thing because they just kind of come
together, which is along with reduce
friction, it's like reduce the number of
clicks or taps it takes for someone to
accomplish something, which is almost
always exactly the wrong thing. Like
it's um the easiest way like you could
make any action in your app a single
click or tap by just exposing every
single possibility on one screen that
scrolls for thousands and thousands and
thousands and thousands of pages, right?
And obviously that's terrible. So why do
people think that a little bit of that
is good? And you know, here's an
example. Like you open a menu, there's
14 things that people might want to do.
Um, okay, level one is group them into
like items and put a vertical, sorry, a
horizontal divider between them. So, at
least people can kind of chunk and and
see what there is. Step two is present
the two or three most common things or
the five most common things, whatever,
and then have some form of other. and
you you know then you go to a submen
that has more items and you the decision
of like how to tune that becomes
incredibly important. I'm going to pick
on Google again just because it is I
feel like I'm Donald Trump here but I'm
going interrupt myself again with a
story. It's I'm at some some conference
or event. And I don't remember wrote it
was and this is probably eight years ago
and uh it's we're in the bar after the
sessions ended in this thing and John
Collison from Stripe is there um and uh
Sundar CEO of Google is there and John
sorry Patrick goes up to the Sundar uh
and they can talk about anything right
like you know Stripe wasn't at the
behemoth it was now at that point but it
was still like a you know a significant
company was up and I mean, and what does
uh Patrick want to talk to about? It's
in the Gmail um app, the dragging of
people like you when you reply all um to
a message, you often want to change the
the two recipient to CC and move someone
from CC to two or something like that.
And just how physically like the the
degree of dexterity that's required to
do that inside of the Gmail app is very
high. It still hasn't been fixed, but it
really struck me that like, you know,
Patrick could have asked for anything.
It could have been any talk. It could
have been a partnership. It was like it
was so irritating to him um that it
worked like this and couldn't couldn't
quite get over it. So anyway, back to
bashing on on Google who in many
respects do an incredible job and
there's all kinds of amazing stuff they
do and blah blah blah. But the the Gmail
actions on an individual email are
broken into two very long menu items
that are different. And
one of them doesn't exist on either
menu. There's an unlabeled icon is the
only way to do it. And that's to mark
something as unread once it's read. Um I
have no idea why some of the actions are
in one menu and some of the actions are
in another menu. I think it's because
some of them have to do with an
individual email. Some of them have to
do with the whole thread, but it doesn't
seem very consistent. Every possible
thing is listed there in one place. And
so it becomes incredibly difficult to
use because sometimes you have to tap in
both tap menus, read all the options and
say, "Okay, that I've used the process
of illumination and it's not here, so it
must be it must be there." The Uber
doesn't work like this anymore, but when
I first brought this up to people inside
of Slack, there was a moment when the
Uber app when you opened it was just
where would you like to go and other and
other was everything like change your
payment method, uh set your location if
you be any anything you could do in
Uber. And that was perfect because
almost all of the time people just
wanted to choose where they wanted to
go. Sometimes you wanted to change where
your pickup was cuz you weren't there
yet or or whatever. And that was just
like what could be simpler than I'm
going to tell you where I want to go or
I'm going to achieve something else. I
really tried to push people to what is
the thing that people or what is the two
things or what is a maybe three things
that people could want to do here and
then put everything behind other. And
then um
if it takes them eight clicks or taps to
do something but every single one is
trivially easy that's great. if it, you
know, you reduce that to two clicks or
taps, but every part of it is this
fraught decision where I'm opening all
of the menus and trying to figure out
like which thing is the right thing and
and like the more comparing three things
to each other is this difficult four
things it's kind of like geometrically
more expensive to compare 15 different
options all to the other to see if this
is the one that you might want um you
know just becomes impossibly expensive.
So to me those are all really um
connected and if we if people could get
over the idea of reducing friction as a
number of goal or reducing the number of
clicks or taps to do something and
instead focus on how can I make this
simple? How how do I prevent people from
having to think in order to use my
software? How can I make this trivially
easy? One one last example uh because
this this was really influential for me.
So I was going back and forth between
Vancouver in San Francisco at the time
when we were talking about all this
inside of Slack and I was behind a
teenager in line to board the plane and
it was like, you know, we're on the
jetway and it took a long time and I was
watching her use Snapchat and it was
insane. Like she was tapping at least
four times a second, sometimes like six
or seven times a second. It was like
dismissing stories and doing stuff, but
there was a fluidity to it because
everything was like a dead like do I
want to see this again? Do I want to see
the next story from this person? to ask
her to a different person. Do I like
instead she she um a notification came
up. She answered someone's thing. She
took a selfie of herself and everything
was just like
so she was you know tapping four times a
second for six minutes. I mean probably
there was some some breaks in there and
that was like the highest and best use
of Snapchat for a 15year-old girl in
2016 or whenever that was. Um, and
imagine if the goal was to try to make
her cap less, you know, like how how
much of an impediment it would have been
to the experience that both her and
Snapchat wanted to create. It's so fun
to listen to this and the examples you
gave of it gives us a lot of insight
into the way your mind works of just
constantly unsatisfied with the way
other products work with your products.
And I think that's core like Patrick is
a good example of Stripe. I feel like
that's a recurring theme with very
successful product leaders, just
constantly unsatisfied and unhappy with
how things work.
>> Yeah. I love just even the way you
summarize this just like a really good
reframing of instead of obsessing with
reducing friction and reducing steps,
instead think how do I how do I uh
reduce the amount of thinking the user
has to do? I I I've never heard of it
described as like you have to think
about the ATP and glucose being used to
actually think and your goal is to
reduce that versus let's just reduce
friction, reduce clicks.
>> Yeah. I I think um in my more cynical
examples, I would I would say to people
like
stop what you're doing for a second,
close your eyes, take a couple deep
breaths, and then pretend that you're an
actual human being and open their eyes
again and then look at this thing and
see can you figure out what it's
supposed to do or say or what you're
what action you're in supposed to take
or what the impact will be if you take
that action. There's a whole another
related cycle. But before I get into it,
because I know that I'm verbose, um I
want to wrap up your your last example
of people being unsatisfied. So here's
the quote that I was trying to find.
This is um [snorts]
2014. So like that that was the year
that Slack actually launched officially
uh in February and this is now like near
the end of the year. I was interviewed
by uh MIT Technology Review and asked if
we were working to improve Slack. Uh I
said, "Oh god, yeah, I try to instill
this into the rest of the team, but
certainly I feel like what we have right
now is just a giant piece of [__] Like
it's just terrible and we should be
humiliated that we offer this to the
public." Not everyone finds that
motivational though. So I came into the
office the next day and people had
printed out on like 40 pieces of 8 and 1
half by 11 paper that quote and like and
pasted it up on the wall. But to me that
was like
you should be embarrassed by it like it
should be a perpetual desire to improve.
You should never be like oh this is
great. I mean you could be proud of
individual pieces of work but in the
aggregate if you can't see almost
limitless opportunities to improve then
you shouldn't be designing the product
or you shouldn't be in charge of the
company or you shouldn't you know um
almost nothing you know again you could
reduce it down to a tiny feature is
anywhere close to to perfect and if a
that's acknowledged freely inside the
organization and b people think about
like continually improving as the goal
and that could be like six sigma Toyota
Kaizen like that kind of side of thing
or it could be that story that um I
can't remember his name right now the
guy who started Bridgewwater tells about
um
>> yeah Ray Dalio uh in his book talks
about um Michael Jordan learning to ski
every time he messed up he wanted the
ski instructor to tell him exactly what
he was doing wrong because to him every
one of those was like a gem um that he
could collect and and he could you know
actually become a good skier and what he
wanted to do was become a good skier
that requires a lot of trust inside the
organization. Um but if you can get to
the point where like hey we're are
trying to to find improvements we're
trying to be critical because you're
trying to make this as great as it can
possibly be. Um,
not always, not with every person, but
most of the time with most people, you
can get them to the point where that
like really direct criticism is actually
motivational. It is like, you know,
people are uh
grateful to have like the feedback
whether that's coming from their peers
inside the company or from end users or
the product because you realize, oh
yeah, that is that is bad and we should
fix it.
>> This episode is brought to you by
Lovable. Not only are they the fastest
growing company in history, I use it
regularly and I could not recommend it
more highly. If you've ever had an idea
for an app, but didn't know where to
start, Lovable is for you. Lovable lets
you build working apps and websites by
simply chatting with AI. Then you can
customize it, add automations, and
deploy it to a live domain. It's perfect
for marketers spinning up tools, product
managers prototyping new ideas, and
founders launching their next business.
Unlike no code tools, Lovable isn't
about static pages. It builds full apps
with real functionality, and it's fast.
What used to take weeks, months, or
years, you can now do over a weekend.
So, if you've been sitting on an idea,
now [music] is the time to bring it to
life. Get started for free at
lovable.dev.
That's lovable.dev.
This makes me think about a let's call
it a rant that you have about how it
takes a lot of work to make anything
work at all. that just the default state
is not working. You just share share
what you share there.
>> Yeah. Um I mean so this is a lot to do
with um
and maybe this is more recent than other
shows up in politics a lot for me. Um
but uh by the way if any of your anyone
listening to this can help me find this
tweet storm from somewhere between 2016
and 2020. I don't have a precise idea.
And it was this guy's thread about how
hard it was to get u a stop sign set up.
And I think I believe it was in response
to someone claiming that Bitcoin is
going to replace US dollars. U was
something something about crypto. And
his point was like, here's what happened
when we tried to get a stop sign put up
on a residential street in my
neighborhood. And the literal years it
took and the number of agencies that
were involved like the engineering
department, traffic planners, the HOA,
the I don't remember the all of the
organizations. Um because if I did that,
I could search better and find this
again because it was truly a masterpiece
of how difficult it is to get a stop
sign put up in in most places.
The message that I hear from most
politicians, and unfortunately this
works really well, is, you know, things
should be good, but they're not because
someone is doing something bad, which is
preventing the goodness. So, um,
billionaires are making things
unaffordable or immigrants are taking
your jobs or, uh, lazy freeloaders are
sucking off the government and causing
us all have to pay more taxes or
something like that. The reality is like
almost nothing works. It's actually
another colise in this case John has a
great encapsulation of this. I'm sure
you you're familiar with it like that it
ends with the world is a museum of
passion projects because for anything to
get done at all requires like not just
the resources and and effort you know
required to instantiate that thing in
the in the real world but all of the
politicking and the sociology and the
convincing and um there's a book called
uh why nothing works recently which is
like
it's not an I'm Sorry to the author if
they out there listening, but just it's
not like an amazingly written book. I
found it like um a little bit
repetitive. Uh but the the content was
really incredible. Just explaining why
it's so hard and how there's this
progressive increase in the number of of
vetos that are available for any kind of
course of action and how difficult it
is. And this shows up in like you know
in permitting for new construction and
stuff like that but also shows up
obviously inside of organizations. And
the challenge is that people
a I think this is evolutionary
biological
um it's hard for us to understand the
world except by anthropomorphizing it.
And so it like if it didn't rain this
year, it's because a god is mad and
probably because we didn't sacrifice
enough goats or something last last
year. It's hard for people to understand
just that wild weather is incredibly
complex and chaotic and ecosystems and
climatology blah blah. Same thing with
the world. if if I uh am struggling to
uh you know pay all of my bills and be
able to afford like a little bit of
luxury in the sense of like a vacation
or a present for my kids or whatever.
It's got to be somebody's fault. Like
there has to be a decision that's made
somewhere. And the reality is everything
is so complicated. Everything is so
multivariate. Um it's not satisfying.
It's a terrible political message. um
it's much easier to say that there is
like uh oh we understand why things are
bad in the way that you're concerned
about and it's turns out that it's
someone's decision um and because of
them it's bad and so if we got rid of
them or you know we're able to overcome
their decision overturn it um and
institute our own thing then things
would be good for you uh and this really
to me shows up inside of organizations
as well I'll I'll pause there I know
kind of along those lines you're a a big
uh believer in something called
Parkinson's law.
>> Yeah. So that the original of that is I
think it's 1956. It's an article in the
economist
by Parkinson. Um and uh the maxim is
work expands to fill the time available
for its completion.
And
the way that it shows up this is a
little bit subtle. of like um one of the
things I found since I don't have a job
is there's much less time pressure and
and that maximum like uh if you want
something done give it to a busy person
the inverse is also true that like if
you're not that busy wow basic things
take a really long time and so Parkinson
actually starts off with this example of
like you know writing and posting a
letter and I don't remember who he used
the first example but someone who's like
you know incredibly busy and has all
these things they have to respond to and
then another case like a a retire robot
who has all the time in the world. It
takes her a long time to write the
letter. It takes her a long time to put
it in the envelope and then go to the
post office and post it. But the real
meat of it is um
for me later when he talks about the
size of the organization and he uses a
bunch of examples. This is again 1950s
so uh and he's British. Um so he's
looking at the the Royal Navy and
specifically he's looking at a chart
that shows the relationship between the
number of capital ships in the Navy, the
number of sailors uh and the number of
administrators. and very familiar graph
for for people looking at like any part
of government, any part like the
relationship between the number of
administrators at a university and the
number of students and faculty, the
teaching faculty where it's like okay
the number of ships goes like this and
the number of sailors is like right
along with it and the number of
administrators goes like this. And the
reason this this ties into the work
expands to fill the time available for
its completion is um
people hire and they train. And um
here's the kind of sad truth for anyone
running a company is there are
exceptions. There's like certain types
of engineers that are accepting to this,
but the overwhelming majority of people
you hire want to hire more people who
report to them. And it's not because
they're evil and it's not because
they're stupid. In fact, they're smart
because everyone knows that the number
of people report to you correlates with
like your career trajectory, your the
amount of money that you're paid, the
amount of authority you have inside the
organization and on and on and on. So
like we would hire 27y old product
managers in Slack who immediately want
to hire someone. It's like what the hell
what would that person do? And like they
articulate it this way, but essentially
it's like well that person would do the
product management and then I would do
strategy.
>> Classic. It's it's really I think the
essential thing to understand about this
is it's not because people are evil and
it's not because they're stupid and it's
to me very related to the everything is
complex. Um and uh if you maybe this is
my
Butterfills law I haven't thought about
this before but I I tweeted this a very
very long time ago like if you um
everything is simple if you have no idea
what you're talking about. Um
so the the other side of that is like if
something seems simple probably you
don't understand it and
you know there's obvious exceptions to
that but for anything that involves a
large organization or a lot of human
beings if the problem seems simple you
don't get it. So every budget process,
no head of engineering, no head of
sales, no CFO, no GC is ever going to
come back and say like, oh, I actually
think like next year we can just hire
fewer people or we're going to keep it
flat or we're going to like shrink
through attrition because we don't need
any more people to do what we're doing.
Not because they're evil, not because
they're stupid. Uh but it's an almost
overpowering impulse inside the
organization that often leads to
disasters. And so there's a I'll give
one example from Slack's history and I
you know I have tried in the past to
disguise this example so that no one
feels bad about it but I fortunately the
specifics are so important to the
example that it's not disguised and so
I'll just reiterate that the people
involved aren't stupid or or evil. Um
and one example that's um that's from
the outside. So the example inside of
Slack was um
we introduced threads which is the
ability to reply to a message inside of
a channel and let's say you Lenny post a
message I Stuart reply to it you will
automatically get a notification and now
Sarah later on replies to the same
message both you and I um as people who
have posted that thread will receive a
notification that there's been more
activity and so on. So like you know
every single time anyone replies to it.
So when the feature first was um
released or like when we did the final
product review before it was released
the input box was prepopulated with at
the person before you in the thread and
I you know I was using the feature and I
would like put the insertion point there
select all delete and then start writing
my message and it's even if I wanted to
at someone specifically I almost never
wanted to start my sentence with at
because it just made it hard to, you
know, reference what they were saying
before. So, I said, "Get rid of this
because a I think most people won't use
it or if they uh if they did want to add
someone, they're not going to want to do
it at the beginning of the sentence. And
by the way, you're teaching them to use
the product wrong because it's important
that everyone understand that every
previous poster in this thread will
automatically receive a notification
unless they've needed it. So, okay, we
release it. Six months goes by and
suddenly the at thing comes back. And so
I messaged someone on the team and I
said, "Hey, there's been a regression."
I this super weird. I don't know what
happened, but like the the at thing came
back and they said, "Oh no, this is on
purpose." We did a bunch of research.
And so I was like, "What?" And I went
through this and it was if I recall
correctly, it wasn't even like P95
certainty on this analysis, but it was
something like when we do this threads
are 2.17 messages long versus 2.14
messages long on average for when we
don't do it. And so first of all,
why is a longer thread better? Like
maybe a maybe a shorter thread is
better. like it be fewer messages that
people have to go back and forth. Also,
that's such a tiny difference. Also,
again, I don't remember the actual
statistical analysis, so I'm not going
to claim that it was um incorrect. I'm
pretty sure this was outside the the
bounds of of certainty that they could
have had, but the real thing was, oh my
god. So you guys put flags into the
product. You AB tested it. You did the
instrumentation. You created tables in
the in the database or whatever we're
using to record all of that. You wrote
queries to pull that. You created charts
based on that data. You had meetings to
discuss it. And just like kind of
unpacking all of the things that would
have had to happen for this to come
back. And it's like you know thousands
of person hours kind of at a minimum
because any feature change at at that
scale of organization it's involving
like a dozen people engineering QA uh
analytics teams product managers user
research and stuff like that.
The problem with that, so I think it was
a bad idea, right? But the problem with
that was the difference that you could
possibly achieve between having this
feature and not having this feature is
like this much, whatever units you want.
The cost of doing the analysis was this
much. So it's guaranteed to be a loser.
Like there's just there's no world in
which anyone could imagine putting the
at previous respondent in the thread at
the beginning of the message could
possibly make that much of a difference
to the quality of Slack and the how how
much utility it provides to people and
and all of that. But you know that to to
like put the feature flags in, to ship
new versions of the product, to put the
instrumentation in, to have it all the
API calls, to record every action that
people take, to to do all the analytics,
to create the dashboard, to put that,
you know, paste a screenshot of that
into a Google Slides presentation, to
send the invitations to the meeting, to
reschedule the meeting because someone
couldn't make it, to have everyone sit
down and look at the thing, like, you
know, guaranteed loser. And I know that
you that Fared told you to ask me about
this um hyper realistic work-like
activities. And so here's my my my grand
theory. Um hyperrealistic work-like
activities is goes along with this other
concept called known valuable work to
do. And when I say known, I mean both
you know what it is and you know that
it's valuable. And the problem with
almost every organization at the very
beginning you have an enormous amount of
work that you know what to do and you
know that it's going to be valuable. So
like starting a business, open a bank
account because like there's almost
infinite generative value of opening a
bank account you you have to do it. You
it's very simple to do. And so at the
very beginning of of any startup they're
like I'm like creating a users table and
I'm like doing salting passwords and
like you're doing all the things that
are kind of absolutely necessary and
everyone knows exactly what they are.
And so that's like everyone's going to
work in the morning. like right on and
like I have 10 things to do and every
single one of them is like something I
know how to do and it's like definitely
going to be valuable. Time goes on and
the relationship between the supply of
work to do and the demand for doing work
just starts to change. More and more
people get hired. Every product manager
wants to hire a junior product manager.
Every new person, the first person you
bring in on the risk and compliance team
is like, "Oh my god, we have there's so
many risks and things we have to be
compliant with. we better hire more
people on my team to do more risk and
compliance work which probably you know
to some degree is right but we're going
to have more and more of those people
and they're going to call meetings with
each other. Um and now suddenly you have
all these people with work to do and
you've done all the easy obvious stuff
and now your questions are like god
should we do fed ramp high and make a
gov slack version which is going to
require us to have wholly separate
physical infrastructure for the hardware
that runs the the software and also a
whole different operations team which
has only US citizens on it. what is the
possible number of of uh dollars that we
could make from doing this and how much
complexity is going to be when we want
to do updates to the software because we
be updating two totally separate
independent systems and it just gets out
of whack. And so people end up like if
you hire 17 product marketers, you're
going to have 17 product marketers worth
of demand for work to do. And if you
don't have sufficient supply of product
marketing work to do, they're just going
to do other stuff. Again, very
important. Not because they're stupid,
not because they're evil, but because
they're like, "I'm a product marketer
and I want to like be recognized for my
work and my spouse is like has um uh
criticized me because they think like I
should have already got promoted in the
last cycle and I really got to
demonstrate some wins here and whatever
it is." And so people are like calling
meetings with their colleagues to
preview the deck that they're going to
show in the big meeting to get feedback
on whether they should like improve some
of the slides. And that hyperrealistic
worklike activity is superficially
identical to work. Like we are sitting
in a conference room and you are there's
something being projected up there and
we're all talking about it and that's
exactly what work is. And you know
hopefully not all of work in for
everyone inside of your company but you
know that's uh exactly what we do when
we're working but this is actually a
fake bit of work and it's so subtle that
I I'll do it you know our board members
will do it every exact will do it and
the further you are from like having all
of the contacts and all the information
and um the decision-m authority and
stuff like that the easier it is to get
trapped in that stuff and people will
just perform enormous amounts of
hyperrealistic worklike activities and
have no idea that that's what they're
doing and the you know the result of
that I guess is that if you are a leader
if you're a manager director an
executive the CEO it's on you to ensure
that there is sufficient supply of known
valuable work to do um and there almost
always is but you know it's creating the
clarity around that creating the
alignment making sure everyone
understands that that's what they're
supposed to be doing and and then
obviously doing Amazing. I could listen
to Stuart Rans all day. Hyperrealistic
worklike activities. We need to coin
this.
>> Uh, and
>> unfortunately it doesn't make a good
acronym. It's pretty ugly.
>> Try.
>> And just to close the loop on that, the
the solution is uh the leader
recognizing this is happening and
stopping it, telling people why are we
spending time on this thing that is not
going to get us anywhere.
>> Yeah. and and and that what you just
said probably isn't the best way because
that sounds like they're you know you're
chiding them and they're dumb when it's
actually your responsibility to make
sure that there's you know sufficient
clarity around what the priorities are
and you know explicitly saying no to
things upfront and stuff like that
rather than words and say like hey you
guys are much idiots wasting your time
on this thing that doesn't matter whose
fault is it you know it's it's the
manager's fault it's the VP of
whatever's fault it's the CX whatever
it's the C ultimately it's like it's the
the leader of the organization that has
the responsibility to make sure that
there is sufficient known valuable work
to do.
>> Um and it's that's actually harder than
it might appear.
>> Okay. Uh before we run out of time I
want to touch on two other topics. One
is when people think of Stuart
Butterfield I think a lot of people
think of we don't sell saddles here.
your legendary Medium post that uh is
just I don't know it's become a historic
piece of literature in the in the annals
of product building and in startups. I
haven't heard people ask you much about
this recently. So let me just ask a
couple questions. One is just what was
the what was the reason you put that
out? Why what was the backstory on
writing that memo? Why was it necessary?
>> Well, it really was an internal memo and
there's a bit of a digression.
Um, one of the the crappy things about
Slack, um, is if all your or corporate
communication is on email, depending on
exactly how it works and what system you
use, you probably walk away with an
archive of everything you said at
company X. Um, if it's Slack, once
you're turned off, you like you lose
access to all their history. And so,
it's kind of like, oh man, if I had only
exported all of my messages before I
left, I would have all this stuff. But
that was it was absolutely verbatim. And
I did not change a word of what I said
inside the company. What I think we were
still eight people maybe, you know, at
most 10, but I think it was eight
people.
>> It was before Slack launched even.
>> Yeah, it was before Slack launch. was
like when we're doing a private beta and
the point of it was to like to start to
instill those
ideas as early as possible and really
create this alignment inside of that
small team so that it could persist and
survive as we grew and and scaled. Um,
and yeah, that that was the that was the
idea. And the gist, just for people that
aren't super familiar with it, but we'll
link to it, is just it's not enough just
to build a great product. You just as
much have to put effort into
communicating what this does for them,
the problem this is solving for them,
the outcome this is going to achieve for
them. Is that a good way to think about
it?
>> Yeah. And again, you know, like
comparing it to beer or cars, um,
beer is goes back to pre-ivilization.
cars were obviously I didn't but you
know so at some point you had to
convince people why they would win a car
instead of a horse um
for your new um
AI based recruiting tool or your
calendar app or whatever there's some
reason why people you think that people
should use yours instead of the thing
that they're using now which might be
like a wholesale one for one replacement
or more often is like a change in the
way that you're working that has a bunch
of other agencies and you want to expand
into these other categories and model
you're not just responsible for creating
the product but also to certain degree
creating the market and and creating you
know there's this book uh positioning um
which is an absolute classic it's very
short I would recommend everyone read it
where the the point of it is from my
perspective it's almost impossible to
create a net new idea in someone's head
it's much easier to take a couple of
existing ideas and and put them together
so it's much easier to say it's like jaw
meet Star Wars Star Wars or it's Uber
for pets or something like that than to
come up with like an a actual new idea.
But you you have to do that cuz you look
if your thing is different in any
significant way from the alternatives
and you're not just creating the
product, you're creating the market.
They're really kind of one and the same.
The reason I wanted to touch on it is I
think still people continue to not
listen to this advice and can continue
to overinvest in more features, more
more products, things like that. Just
the the specific example of we don't
sell saddles here just to quickly
communicate this to folks and correct me
if I'm missing anything is just instead
of hey look at this amazing saddle we've
bought. Would you want to communicate us
here go horseback riding look at this
incredible experience you can have and
and then they decide oh [__] I need to
go buy a saddle to do that.
>> Yeah. and and
100% um that aspect of it is is not
original because I think that's
something that marketers have done for a
long time. Certainly in the in Marcom
and advertising like if you want to sell
Harley-Davidsons, there are people who
are going to geek out on the engines and
stuff like that and like the quality of
the leather and stuff like that. But
what you're selling is not the
motorcycle, you're selling like the open
road and freedom and the wind in your
hair. And if you're Lululemon, you are
obviously selling yoga pants, but you're
also selling like health and aspiration
and being the best version of yourself
and you know a bunch of other stuff. So
selling that.
>> Oh my god, I forgot the classic version
of it. You know, like
>> there's the selling this
screwdriver.
>> Oh. Oh yeah, the nail.
>> Yeah, the nail. Anyway,
>> yeah. What is that one? [laughter]
There's the Well, there's the one I
think about is instead of trying to
convince men to build a ship, instill a
yearning for the sea.
>> Yes, exactly. That's a goes back in uh
in history.
>> Okay. Let me ask you about pivoting. Uh
you are potentially the king of pivots.
You started two companies, both famously
pivoted, both from video games, which is
why I asked you about that at the
beginning, into very successful
companies. I imagine many people come to
you for advice on pivoting. I I let me
just ask when folks come to you asking
should I stick with my idea, should I
pivot, what sort of advice do you find
most helps them?
>> Yeah, I mean I think it's um partly
uh
an intuition because like obviously the
decision is about like have you
exhausted the possibilities? Um, and in
the case where, you know, we were
working on Glitch, this game where we
used IRC for internal communication, and
we added a bunch of IRC, which became
the proto Slack. And I think Slack had
an enormous advantage in the fact that
we were working on this for several
years without actually explicitly
working on it and only doing the minimum
number of um features that were, you
know, absolutely
guaranteed to be successful in the sense
that it was so irritating that we
couldn't stand it anymore or such an
obvious improvement that we couldn't
help but take advantage of it. We still
had like $9 million left and everyone
still liked the game and we were all
happy working on it. But I think by that
point I had exhausted every non
ridiculous longshot idea to make it
commercially successful. Um and so
decided to um to abandon it. But you
know the default advice for anyone in
anything is persevere is like you know a
kitten hanging off the branch and a
poster says hang in there. And you know,
I think there's a idea that you just
like and then there's so many stories of
like so and so started out going door
todo and was rejected by everyone and
then suddenly there was Nike or or
something like that and like just if you
stick out stick with it long enough
you'll eventually be successful. I think
you have to really be coldly rational
and um now
some of this shows up in the book um
thinking about some of it's in Annie
Duke's second book the title of which
I'm forgetting right now but someone
will will know it
>> bets and then yeah what was the last
second I forget
>> uh she actually uses glitch and and
slack as an example of like a smart fold
basically like my expected value here
has diminished to the point where this
alternative looks more attractive. And
the reason I say you have to be coldly
rational about it is because it's
[__] humiliating, you know, like like
we I convinced so many and you have to
convince so many people to get a company
out there. You have to go to investors,
you have to go to early employees and
say like you should leave your other job
and come work for this because you know
here's the the an incredible future
we're imagining. you have to go to the
press and you have to make all these
promises and you have users and you've
like committed things to the users and
you've convinced them to give up their
time for this thing. And so it's I I
think for a lot of people uh it feels
better to just keep doing it until it
dies
um of suffocation
due to lack of capital or something like
that. Uh then to to admit like okay I
was wrong. This didn't this didn't work.
And it's it's humiliating. It's painful.
It's like it's wrenching. It has a bad
impact. You know, like there's when we
shut down Glitch, there's a lot of
people who loved it and would spend all
of their free time and couldn't wait to
get home from work to go play it more.
And that was their community. And the
community just like disappeared. All
these people and all these identities
have been created. And obviously people
lost their jobs and and people who had
like moved their families to a different
city in order to take this job now
weren't going to have a job anymore. So
pivots aren't something I take lightly.
And you shouldn't be um
I think it's very different to be like
there's three of us and we started
making this app and then we pivoted to a
different app. That doesn't even really
count. You know, like if you're 6 months
into something, you're just you're still
messing around. You're trying to figure
out what it is that you're you're
building. It's not really a pivot.
Obviously, in this case, it worked out
great and there's survivorship bias and
that doesn't mean that everyone should
pivot all the time. Um but I I think it
is creating the distance so that you can
make an intellectual rational decision
about it rather than an emotional
decision is is essential.
>> I love also your piece of advice of just
exhaust once you've exhausted all the
ideas that's a really good time to see
what else is out there.
>> Yeah. Exhaust all the all the good
ideas.
>> All the good ideas.
>> All the realistic. Yeah.
>> Yeah. The uh the point you made about
just kind of persevering. Uh I just had
Melanie Perkins. of Canva in the
podcast. Uh they went through a hundred
investors rejected her before somebody
finally decided to invest and she just
kept pushing.
>> Yeah. But I think that's a slightly
different example, right? Because like
the she believed in the Yeah. Then she
believed in the in the concept of the in
the product and like in the in the
vision and was just trying to figure out
the right articulation to get investors
who ended up being obviously very very
happy.
>> Extremely happy. Oh jeez. Okay. Maybe a
final topic depending on how time goes.
I want to talk about generosity.
I talked to a bunch of people as I said
that have worked with you and the number
one theme that came up again and again
and again when I asked them about you
and what they what has stuck most with
them is is just generosity. So I'm going
to read a few examples that I heard from
folks uh that are examples of your
generosity over the years. So, one
person shared that uh he needed a little
money before Christmas and you he said,
"Steuart literally walked me out of the
building, went to the cash machine,
handed me $500, told me to go home to my
family." Other folks shared that when
you you talked about Glitch just
recently when you had to lay people off
that you cried real tears when you were
laying people off and then you spent an
incredible amount of time helping them
find new jobs and extending their
severance pay and just taking it
extremely extremely seriously much more
than I think most people feel like CEOs
do. Someone else shared that you paid
100% of employees health insurance to
give them just fewer things to think
about. uh when you went public you did a
you basically created the best possible
situation for employees no lock up
direct listing
>> also with the structure of the Slack
deal people said the acquisition was
very employee friendly there's also just
a bunch of that's employees there's also
just the way you thought about customers
a few examples you gave free credits to
businesses who were struggling to pay
the bills during co you released this
fair billing which I think was very
innovative at the time where you didn't
charge you stopped charging people for
seats they weren't using even though
signed a deal to charge for those seats.
A lot of times just you slipped release
schedules because you just wanted to
make features better and better for
people. And I'll end with this quote.
Stuart is a leader who takes the
responsibility he feels for his
employees personally and to which he
extends the most generous circumstances
he could muster. That feels worth
celebrating.
So first of all, I just want to
celebrate you. I think it's really rare
and inspiring to meet a leader like
that. Clearly, you've had a lot of
impact on a lot of people. I don't know
exactly the question I want to ask, but
I guess was this is this like an in what
part is this intentional just like this
is how we win. I'm going to be very
generous and help people because I know
this will help long term. How much is
this just in this just the way you are
as a person?
>> I I think a lot of it is just the way I
am as a person and uh I had wonderful
parents who raised me, right? But I
think there's also um there is a little
bit of a lesson there and I'm just going
to assume people's familiarity with the
the prisoners dilemma. Um the you know
acts of generosity to me are a way of
demonstrating that I am going to
cooperate as we iterate in this game.
>> Um and if you do that then people will
also cooperate and you both benefit. Um
whereas if you never really know if the
other person is going to defect at the
first opportunity um then your best bet
is to defect. And so you know there is a
game theoretic aspect usually in games
that are much much much more complicated
than the prisoners dilemma. Um, I think
another thing, you know, one thing we uh
I I didn't touch on before, but to me
was important enough that at more than
one company all hands, I made everyone
in the company like repeat this as a
chant. Um, it was in the long run the
measure of of our success will be the
amount of value that we create for
customers. Um, and I wanted to be super
clear and explicit about that because it
should be if anything you're doing feels
like a little bit shady, a little bit
cheating, a little bit like um
maximizing um
in the in the at the wrong moment or
taking advantage of a customer or
anything like that, we definitely
shouldn't do it because to me it was
just like I mean I think it's uh
literally true, but it's also like and
uh an ethical way to run a business and
and um it's not just that the ethics are
good. It's like there's advantages for
you like you're able to attract a better
class of employee. Like if all your
employees are are ethical, then it's
going to be a better place for everyone
to work and you're going to be happier
and you're going to have fewer internal
problems and and all that stuff. Um, but
I think it really is true that there's
no like especially in the long run.
You can't like destroy value for your
customers and expect to be successful.
You have to actually make their lives
better. Um, and you can put effort into
like pointing it out to them and and
demonstrating that you have created this
value and stuff like that, but there's
no substitute for actually having
created it. I think that um is
incredibly important and that implies a
real generosity whether that's in
negotiating terms with an any enterprise
deal or that's like policy decisions.
You sometimes
say one one time that it blew up in our
face was our SLA was like for any
downtime you get a 100 times your money
back. um which was like because from my
perspective it's like you know if we're
down for two minutes it doesn't it's
like pennies. It doesn't really make any
difference. If we're down for like 10
hours or something like that then we
have bigger problems than paying back
people that okay fast forward we you
know we now have hundreds of millions of
dollars in revenue and we've gone public
and like shortly after we go public we
have like one of the biggest outages we
ever had. I don't remember how long it
was, but it was like many hours. But by
the time we got to that scale, a hundred
times the money back for like the third
of a day that we were down was like
$8 million or some something like that,
which had to be um you know, it didn't
cost us any money because we just gave
it to people with former credits, but it
meant that a bunch of revenue that we
had already anticipated for the next
quarter wasn't going to show up because
people's credits were going to offset
what they would have otherwise paid us.
Um and so uh we we definitely changed
the terms of service after that because
being a public company is a little bit
different but you know in every other
respect I think you know there were all
really important decisions that were
helpful in um in us becoming successful.
>> Was that policy it was automatic like
you didn't even have to claim it. It was
just automatically get this credit
>> and like and then the default is you
don't have to pay if you let us know and
this was we will automatically like
proactively preemptively without any
input from you apply this credit to your
account and just like send you a message
and it happened and by the way
>> we will do it on the aggregate for
downtime even if the issue didn't affect
you as a as a customer.
>> Too generous. You found the the edge
where you might want to be. [laughter]
>> Yeah. What was that mantra again that
you uh had the company chant? I think
this is a really nice way to end it.
>> In the long run, the measure of our
success will be the amount of value we
create for customers.
>> Incredible. I'm just trying to picture
the entire team at Slack.
>> Like hundreds of people. It felt very
like Chin or like Stalin or something
like that. [laughter]
>> Well, on that note, most people don't
know this about you, but your uh your
actual name when you were born is not
Stuart. It was Dharma.
>> Yeah. And this all makes sense as you
learn that.
>> Yeah. It's like I had my name is Dharma
Jeremy Butterfeld. So my parents named
me and when I was 12 I changed it
because I just like really wanted to be
normal. And for some reason I thought
Steuart was a normal name. And by the
way, you'll notice this now that I said
it. Any character except for Steuart
Little. Um anytime you see a character
in in a movie, a novel, TV show,
whatever, there's only the loser Stewart
and the [__] Stewart. It's it's like
it's obviously in the collective
consciousness a terrible name and I
shouldn't have chosen it and I regret
it. But by the time I realized that
Dharma and Greg had already come out and
would have seemed like I was like, you
know, bandwagon jumping and people
thought it was a girl's name even though
in India it's obviously only a boy's
name. I'm going to add just one last
little tidbit because I forgot about
this earlier on and I think it helps tie
things together.
>> Let's do it.
>> And it's called the owner's illusion and
this is based on something I posted on
Twitter. the person who came up with the
name later deleted their account and so
I have no idea who it was of who to
credit for this but what I had posted
was and this is a long time ago be when
restaurant websites have gotten better
and it doesn't really matter because
Google local has taken over everything
but this is like let's say 10 years ago
there's five things you could possibly
want when you go to a restaurant's
website and is their street address
their phone number the menu the hours of
operation oh my god I forgetting the
fifth
Oh, and and making a reservation. How to
make a reservation. Um, and again, this
problem has like to some extent taken
care of itself or at least to brute. But
what you would get was like this super
slow loading photo like Ken Burns effect
as it go and like and then like fading
in and then some music starts playing
and then if they show you the phone
number, it's not a clickable editor.
It's not even text that you can copy
because it's yes, it's an image.
um and they don't have the hours, they
don't put the address or whatever and
it's just like what for sure whoever
made this website for the restaurant
owner and the restaurant owner
themselves have definitely been in the
position where they went to somebody
else's restaurant website because they
wanted to get the address or the opening
hours or the phone number or whatever.
So, how why does it end up like this and
what should we call this? And the
whoever replied to the tweet um she said
we should call the owner's delusion. And
I was like, oh my god, that's perfect.
And I think that um is incredibly
powerful and it what ends up with the
result like Apple naming whatever that
feature is called sleep which is like
it's too hard to understand what could
that could possibly mean and that's why
like people anticipate um despite the
fact that when they get to their web
your website for the first time their
their intent is absolutely the minimum
number of micro points above the
threshold required for them to actually
take that action. You're like, "All
right, like welcome to my website." And
there [laughter]
there's a bunch of like BS and there's a
bunch of like stuff that doesn't make
any sense and the buttons are
inscrutable and it's unclear what to do
next because I think that my thing is so
important and I don't recognize that you
are at work and you were late this
morning and you have to go to the
bathroom and you're just like you're
just like a regular human being who has
like stuff going on. You're concerned
that your kids will [__] up and they
getting in trouble at school and stuff
like that. They don't they're not like
subjects who paid money to go to your
play and are sitting in the audience and
waiting for the curtain to go up.
They're like people who are going to
bounce in a fraction of a second and so
everyone should always be conscious of
the honor solution.
>> I love that. What's the solution? Is it
have other people look at it and give
you feedback? Is it
>> Yeah. And and like recognize it. And
unfortunately, it's one of those things
like Murphy's law, like even
>> you go wrong when you like even when you
take into account Murphy's law.
>> But if you if you don't name it and
recognize it and discuss it and like
train yourself to think in that way that
you know, take a breath, pretend you're
a regular person, and then look at this
again and see if it makes sense. Then
>> I love that you're screwed.
>> I love that you threw this in here. I
have a billion other questions I I'm
going to ask you in part two when we do
this someday. Uh Stuart, thank you so
much for doing this. Thank you so much
for being here.
>> Yeah, thank you for having me, Lane. I
really enjoyed it.
>> Same. Same here. Bye, everyone.
Thank you so much for listening. If you
found this valuable, you can subscribe
to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify,
or your [music] favorite podcast app.
Also, please consider giving us a rating
or leaving a review as that really helps
other listeners find the podcast. You
can find all past episodes or learn more
about the show at lennispodcast.com.
[music] See you in the next episode.